CREDIT REPAIR ORGANIZATIONS ACT (15 U.S.C. §§ 1679-1679j)

§ 1679. Findings and purposes

Consumers have a vital interest in establishing and maintaining their credit worthiness and credit standing in order to obtain and use credit. There is a business in providing services to consumers who wish to improve their credit records, credit histories, or credit ratings. Certain advertising and business practices of some companies engaged in the business of credit repair services have worked a financial hardship upon consumers, particularly those of limited economic means and who are inexperienced in credit matters. The purpose of this subchapter is to ensure that prospective buyers of the services of credit repair organizations are provided with the information necessary to make an informed decision regarding the purchase of such services, and to protect the public from unfair or deceptive advertising and business practices by credit repair organizations.

§ 1679a. Definitions

The term "consumer" means an individual.

The term "consumer credit transaction" means any transaction in which credit is offered or extended to an individual for personal, family, or household purposes.

The term "credit repair organization" means any person who uses any instrumentality of interstate commerce or the mails to sell, provide, or perform any service, in return for the payment of money or other valuable consideration, for the express or implied purpose of improving any consumer's credit record, credit history, or credit rating or providing advice or assistance to any consumer with regard to any activity or service that may improve a consumer's credit record, credit history, or credit rating; except that such term does not include any nonprofit organization exempt from taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, any creditor with respect to any consumer, any depository institution, or any federal or state agency.

§ 1679b. Prohibited practices

No person may make any statement, or counsel or advise any consumer to make any statement, which is untrue or misleading, or which omits to state a material fact, with respect to any consumer's credit worthiness, credit standing, or credit capacity to any consumer reporting agency or to any person who has extended credit to a consumer.

No person may make any statement or counsel or advise any consumer to make any statement the intended effect of which is to alter the consumer's identification to prevent the display of the consumer's credit record, history, or rating for the purpose of concealing adverse information that is accurate and not obsolete.

No credit repair organization may charge or receive any money or other valuable consideration for the performance of any service which the credit repair organization has agreed to perform for any consumer before such service is fully performed.

No credit repair organization may charge or receive any money or other valuable consideration for any service in connection with determining whether a consumer wishes to have the credit repair organization perform any service for the consumer.

§ 1679c. Disclosures

Any credit repair organization shall provide any consumer with a statement in writing, before any contract or agreement is executed, containing all of the information required under this section. The statement shall include: the consumer's right to dispute inaccurate information in the consumer's credit report with the consumer reporting agency without charge; the right to sue a credit repair organization that violates this subchapter; the right to cancel any contract with a credit repair organization within 3 business days; a complete and accurate statement of the consumer's right to proceed on the consumer's own behalf without the assistance of a credit repair organization; and a statement that accurate information cannot be permanently altered or removed from the consumer's credit report.

§ 1679d. Written contracts required

No services may be provided by a credit repair organization for any consumer unless a written and dated contract has been signed by the consumer that contains: the total amount of all payments to be made by the consumer to the credit repair organization; a full and detailed description of the services to be performed by the credit repair organization; any guarantees of performance made by the credit repair organization; and a statement that the consumer may cancel the contract without penalty or obligation within 3 business days.

§ 1679e. Right to cancel contract

Any consumer may cancel any contract with any credit repair organization without penalty or obligation by notifying the credit repair organization of the consumer's intention to cancel within 3 business days after the date on which the contract is signed by the consumer. Cancellation shall be effective upon the consumer's written notice of cancellation.

§ 1679f. Noncompliance with this subchapter

Any consumer who is injured by a failure of a credit repair organization to comply with any provision of this subchapter may bring an action in any United States district court or in any other court of competent jurisdiction to recover: the amount of any actual damages sustained; punitive damages; upon a finding that the defendant acted in bad faith, and knew or should have known that its act was not authorized by this subchapter; and attorney's fees.

§ 1679g. Civil liability

Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this subchapter with respect to any other person shall be liable to such person in an amount equal to the sum of the amount of any actual damages sustained by such person as a result of such failure; such punitive damages as the court may allow; and in the case of any successful action, the costs of the action together with reasonable attorney's fees.

§ 1679i. Statute of limitations

Any action to enforce any liability created under this subchapter may be brought before the later of 5 years after the date of the occurrence of the violation or 2 years after the date on which the liability arises.
