FAIR DEBT COLLECTION PRACTICES ACT (15 U.S.C. §§ 1692-1692p)

§ 1692. Congressional findings and declaration of purpose

Abusive debt collection practices contribute to the number of personal bankruptcies, marital instability, loss of jobs, and invasions of individual privacy. Existing laws are inadequate to protect consumers. Means other than misrepresentation or other abusive debt collection practices are available for the effective collection of debts. The purpose of this subchapter is to eliminate abusive debt collection practices, to ensure that debt collectors who refrain from abusive practices are not competitively disadvantaged, and to promote consistent state action to protect consumers.

§ 1692a. Definitions

The term "consumer" means any natural person obligated or allegedly obligated to pay any debt.

The term "debt" means any obligation or alleged obligation of a consumer to pay money arising out of a transaction in which the money, property, insurance, or services which are the subject of the transaction are primarily for personal, family, or household purposes.

The term "debt collector" means any person who uses any instrumentality of interstate commerce or the mails in any business the principal purpose of which is the collection of any debts, or who regularly collects or attempts to collect, directly or indirectly, debts owed or due or asserted to be owed or due another. The term does not include any officer or employee of a creditor while collecting debts for such creditor in the creditor's own name.

The term "communication" means the conveying of information regarding a debt directly or indirectly to any person through any medium.

§ 1692c. Communication in connection with debt collection

Without the prior consent of the consumer given directly to the debt collector, or the express permission of a court of competent jurisdiction, a debt collector may not communicate with a consumer in connection with the collection of any debt at any unusual time or place known to be inconvenient to the consumer, or if the debt collector knows the consumer is represented by an attorney with respect to such debt, or at the consumer's place of employment if the debt collector knows the employer prohibits such communication.

If a consumer notifies a debt collector in writing that the consumer refuses to pay a debt or wishes the debt collector to cease further communication, the debt collector shall not communicate further with the consumer except to advise the consumer that the debt collector's further efforts are being terminated, to notify the consumer that the debt collector may invoke specified remedies, or where applicable, to notify the consumer that the debt collector intends to invoke a specified remedy.

§ 1692d. Harassment or abuse

A debt collector may not engage in any conduct the natural consequence of which is to harass, oppress, or abuse any person. Prohibited conduct includes: the use or threat of use of violence or criminal means; the use of obscene or profane language; publication of a list of consumers who allegedly refuse to pay debts; the advertisement for sale of any debt to coerce payment; causing a telephone to ring or engaging any person in telephone conversation repeatedly with intent to annoy or harass; and placing telephone calls without meaningful disclosure of the caller's identity.

§ 1692e. False or misleading representations

A debt collector may not use any false, deceptive, or misleading representation or means in connection with the collection of any debt. Prohibited representations include: the false representation of the character, amount, or legal status of any debt; the false representation that any individual is an attorney or that any communication is from an attorney; the representation that the consumer committed any crime or other conduct in order to disgrace the consumer; the false representation that the debt collector is affiliated with the United States or any state or local government; the threat to take any action that cannot legally be taken or that is not intended to be taken; the use of any false representation or deceptive means to collect a debt or to obtain information concerning a consumer.

§ 1692f. Unfair practices

A debt collector may not use unfair or unconscionable means to collect any debt. Prohibited conduct includes: the collection of any amount not expressly authorized by the agreement creating the debt or permitted by law; the acceptance of a check postdated by more than five days unless written notice is given to the consumer; the solicitation of any postdated check for the purpose of threatening criminal prosecution; depositing a postdated check prior to the date on the check; and taking or threatening to take any nonjudicial action to effect dispossession of property when there is no present right to possession or no present intention to take possession.

§ 1692g. Validation of debts

Within five days after the initial communication with a consumer, a debt collector shall send the consumer a written notice containing: the amount of the debt; the name of the creditor to whom the debt is owed; a statement that unless the consumer disputes the validity of the debt within 30 days, the debt will be assumed valid; a statement that if the consumer notifies the debt collector in writing within 30 days that the debt is disputed, the debt collector will obtain verification of the debt; and a statement that the debt collector will provide the consumer with the name and address of the original creditor if the original creditor differs from the current creditor.

If the consumer notifies the debt collector in writing within the 30-day period that the debt is disputed, the debt collector shall cease collection of the debt until the debt collector obtains verification of the debt and a copy of such verification is mailed to the consumer.

§ 1692h. Multiple debts

If any consumer owes multiple debts and makes any single payment to any debt collector with respect to such debts, such debt collector may not apply such payment to any debt which is disputed by the consumer.

§ 1692k. Civil liability

Any debt collector who fails to comply with any provision of this subchapter with respect to any person is liable to such person in an amount equal to the sum of any actual damages sustained; in the case of any action by an individual, such additional damages as the court may allow, but not exceeding $1,000; in the case of a class action, such amount as the court may allow for all other class members without regard to a minimum individual recovery, not to exceed the lesser of $500,000 or 1 per centum of the net worth of the debt collector; and in the case of any successful action, the costs of the action, together with a reasonable attorney's fee as determined by the court.

In determining the amount of liability, the court shall consider the frequency and persistence of noncompliance by the debt collector, the nature of such noncompliance, and the extent to which such noncompliance was intentional.
